03_competency_a.md, before:

# Info

A. Demonstrate awareness of the ethics, values, and foundational principles of one of the information professions, and discuss the importance of intellectual freedom within that profession;

- Start with what you understand the competency to mean - define the competency. Be careful to thoroughly address each part of the competency. Explain why it is important to the profession as a whole. Use the rubrics -these are your guidelines to writing a successful statement of competency.
- Discuss what coursework/work experience prepared you for understanding and being able to perform the competency.
- Now present and discuss each piece of evidence you selected - say why you selected this evidence and how it demonstrates your competency and the skills and knowledge you learned.
- Close by discussing how you are able (know how to, or can) apply or transfer your skills and knowledge in the future to different [work] situations or environments.
- You must include a minimum of one piece of evidence for each competency; however, submitting two or three pieces of evidence is preferred. The final decision rests with your e-Portfolio advisor whether more will be required. See Examples of Evidentiary Items for more specifics about evidence. Note: Your evidence should be in its own section either as attachments or URLS.

- INFO 200

# Competency A

## Introduction

The first competency in the SJSU iSchool's graduate MLIS program is to ["demonstrate awareness of the ethics, values, and foundational principles of one of the information professions, and discuss the importance of intellectual freedom within that profession"][comp a]. 

The [Code of Ethics of the American Library Association][code of ethics] (!ref) is the codified set of principles and values that guide the work of various information professionals including those working in an academic library with emerging technologies and digital services.

Originally adopted in 1939 and revised over the years these principles and values act as anchors in an information environment that is under continual change allowing information professionals the freedom to govern themselves when facing ethical dilemmas and situations. 

The Code of Ethics includes the following eight fundamental statements (!ref):

1. We provide the highest level of service to all library users through appropriate and usefully organized resources; equitable service policies; equitable access; and accurate, unbiased, and courteous responses to all requests.
2. We uphold the principles of intellectual freedom and resist all efforts to censor library resources.
3. We protect each library user's right to privacy and confidentiality with respect to information sought or received and resources consulted, borrowed, acquired or transmitted.
4. We respect intellectual property rights and advocate balance between the interests of information users and rights holders.
5. We treat co-workers and other colleagues with respect, fairness, and good faith, and advocate conditions of employment that safeguard the rights and welfare of all employees of our institutions.
6. We do not advance private interests at the expense of library users, colleagues, or our employing institutions.
7. We distinguish between our personal convictions and professional duties and do not allow our personal beliefs to interfere with fair representation of the aims of our institutions or the provision of access to their information resources.
8. We strive for excellence in the profession by maintaining and enhancing our own knowledge and skills, by encouraging the professional development of co-workers, and by fostering the aspirations of potential members of the profession.

These principles are rooted in the goal of establishing enviroments of "intellectual freedom and the freedom of access to information" (!ref ALA ethics).

## Evidence

## Conclusion

## References

SJSU iSchool Competency A
ALA Code of Ethics (website and pdf)

[comp a]: http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies "SJSU iSchool MLIS Core Competencies"
[code of ethics]: http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics "ALA Code of Ethics"

Commit message:

[+]: competency a -> Add more evidence and info

03_competency_a.md, after:

# Info

A. Demonstrate awareness of the ethics, values, and foundational principles of one of the information professions, and discuss the importance of intellectual freedom within that profession;

- Start with what you understand the competency to mean - define the competency. Be careful to thoroughly address each part of the competency. Explain why it is important to the profession as a whole. Use the rubrics -these are your guidelines to writing a successful statement of competency.
- Discuss what coursework/work experience prepared you for understanding and being able to perform the competency.
- Now present and discuss each piece of evidence you selected - say why you selected this evidence and how it demonstrates your competency and the skills and knowledge you learned.
- Close by discussing how you are able (know how to, or can) apply or transfer your skills and knowledge in the future to different [work] situations or environments.
- You must include a minimum of one piece of evidence for each competency; however, submitting two or three pieces of evidence is preferred. The final decision rests with your e-Portfolio advisor whether more will be required. See Examples of Evidentiary Items for more specifics about evidence. Note: Your evidence should be in its own section either as attachments or URLS.

# Competency A

## Introduction

The first competency in the SJSU iSchool's graduate MLIS program is to ["demonstrate awareness of the ethics, values, and foundational principles of one of the information professions, and discuss the importance of intellectual freedom within that profession"][comp a]. 

The [*Code of Ethics of the American Library Association*][ala ethics] (!ref) is the codified set of principles and values that guide the work of various information professionals including those working in an academic library with emerging technologies and digital services.

Originally adopted in 1939 and revised over the years these principles and values act as anchors in an information environment that is under continual change allowing information professionals the freedom to govern themselves when facing ethical dilemmas and situations. 

The *Code of Ethics* includes the following eight fundamental statements (!ref):

1. We provide the highest level of service to all library users through appropriate and usefully organized resources; equitable service policies; equitable access; and accurate, unbiased, and courteous responses to all requests.
2. We uphold the principles of intellectual freedom and resist all efforts to censor library resources.
3. We protect each library user's right to privacy and confidentiality with respect to information sought or received and resources consulted, borrowed, acquired or transmitted.
4. We respect intellectual property rights and advocate balance between the interests of information users and rights holders.
5. We treat co-workers and other colleagues with respect, fairness, and good faith, and advocate conditions of employment that safeguard the rights and welfare of all employees of our institutions.
6. We do not advance private interests at the expense of library users, colleagues, or our employing institutions.
7. We distinguish between our personal convictions and professional duties and do not allow our personal beliefs to interfere with fair representation of the aims of our institutions or the provision of access to their information resources.
8. We strive for excellence in the profession by maintaining and enhancing our own knowledge and skills, by encouraging the professional development of co-workers, and by fostering the aspirations of potential members of the profession.

These principles are rooted in the goal of establishing enviroments of "intellectual freedom and the freedom of access to information" (!ref ALA ethics). 

Other professional information organizations include their own code of ethics including [*A Code of Ethics for Information Scientists*][info science ethics] and the [*WorldCat Rights and Responsibilities for the OCLC Cooperative*][oclc rights].

An example of the application of these ethics and values can be found in the guideline documents from the [*Reference and User Services Association*][rusa] including the [*Health and Medical Reference Guidelines*][rusa health] and [*Guidelines for Behavioral Performance of Reference and Information Service Providers*][rusa behavior]. 

These guidelines find application in variety of professional settings where information professionals interact with patrons and help them find the information they are seeking. 

The performance of an information professional successfully answering the information needs of a patron can be judged based on their professional behavior, understanding and following their organization's policies, and respecting the patron's rights to information.

## Evidence

- INFO 200
    - LIBR200\_Discussion3.txt
- LIBR 210
    - LIBR210\_A6.pages (RUSA guidelines for reference interviews)
    - LIBR210\_D7.md
    - LIBR210\_D8.md
    - LIBR210\_M14.md (archive has questions)

## Conclusion

## References

SJSU iSchool Competency A
ALA Code of Ethics (website and pdf)

[ala ethics]: http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics "ALA Code of Ethics"
[comp a]: http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies "SJSU iSchool MLIS Core Competencies"
[info science ethics]: http://cool.conservation-us.org/bytopic/ethics/asiseth.html "A Code of Ethics for Information Scientists"
[oclc rights]: https://www.oclc.org/worldcat/cooperative-quality/policy.en.html "OCLC Rights and Responsibilities"
[rusa behavior]: http://www.ala.org/rusa/resources/guidelines/guidelinesbehavioral "RUSA Behavioral Performance Guidelines"
[rusa]: http://www.ala.org/rusa/ "RUSA"
