05_competency_c.md, before:

# Competency C

The third core competency is to ["recognize the diversity (such as cultural and economic) in the clientele and employees of an information organization and be familiar with actions the organization should take to address this diversity"](http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies). As technological advancements and societal progress expands our knowledge about the world and its inhabitants one becomes increasingly aware of the diversity that exists in the world. Diversity can be found in various aspects of clientele or employees within a library or information organization. Patrons and employees vary in appearance, physical ability, ethnicity, cultural backgrounds and norms, immigrant status, religious affiliation, gender, education, employment, economic status, and housing. 

In addition to recognizing the diversity that exists within patrons and employees is the need for information organizations to act in ways that help them better understand and reflect this diversity. The [ALA Policy Manual](http://www.ala.org/aboutala/governance/policymanual/updatedpolicymanual/tableofcontents) for diversity states:

"Libraries can and should play a crucial role in empowering diverse populations for full participation in a democratic society. In order to accomplish this, however, libraries must utilize multivariate resources and strategies. In the library workforce, concrete programs of recruitment, training, development, advancement and promotion are needed in order to increase and retain diverse library personnel who are reflective of the society we serve" (ALA, 2016). 

Experiences within the SJSU School of Information MLIS program reinforced the need to recognize and reflect the diversity that exists among an information organization's patrons and employees. A discussion post in LIBR 200 about professional library associations demonstrates an understanding of the value of giving information organizations and information professionals a support network where they can meet others doing similar work but from the context of their own diverse background and circumstances. An essay assignment in LIBR 204 examined qualities of a great leadership by looking at the experience and work of a leader within the library and information profession. Research for this assignment led to understanding that diversity within a team becomes an asset and advantage when the team works towards a unified goal. Helping to meet the needs of blind patrons was the focus of a discussion posting in LIBR 210. This posting shed light on the need to recognize patrons within minority groups and the broader issue of how an information organization can best meet the needs of these underserved populations. A semester-long strategic planning project in LIBR 204 about an existing public library revealed the need for information organizations to develop cultural competency to help them better serve their diverse communities (Evans and Ward, 2007, p. 46). 

## Evidence

The following evidences from previous course work demonstrate an understanding of the diversity among patrons and employees of information organizations as well as actions that can be taken by the organization to reflect that diversity.

1. A discussion post about the value of diverse backgrounds and experience coming together within professional associations.
2. An essay about great leadership demonstrating the value of diversity in helping groups accomplish great things.
3. A discussion posting about meeting the needs of underserved populations. 
4. A strategic planning project showing the diversity within a public library.

### [LIBR 200 Discussion post: Professional Library Associations](https://mlisefolio.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/libr202_d5_library_associations.pdf)

Professional Library Associations give information professionals an opportunity to join a community where they can share ideas, solutions, best practices, job experiences, and job openings. Researching about these associations and writing a discussion post on the research findings demonstrates the diversity present in a professional association and how this diversity can lead to improving everyone. Although the community shares a similar set of professional interests and pursuits the network of information professionals come from diverse cultural and economic backgrounds. Associating with information professionals from diverse backgrounds and settings gives opportunities to learn from each other and see new perspectives that were previously unknown or unfamiliar. Information organizations can encourage their employees to join and participate in a professional library association. This encouragement promotes the value and benefits of diversity to the organization's employees and its surrounding community by ensuring more broadly skilled and trained professionals who effectively serve the needs of the community.

### [LIBR 204 Essay: Good to Great](https://mlisefolio.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/c_reeve_good_to_great.pdf)

An information organization faces the challenge of uniting a diverse group of professionals around a shared vision all can support and trust. Great leaders exhibit the qualities that unite a team or organization around a common purpose and vision. They put the mission of the organization first before themselves or anything else. This assignment looked at the leadership qualities exhibited by Daniel J. Cohen the current executive director of the [Digital Public Library of America (DPLA)](http://www.dp.la).

Cohen has spent most of his professional career on digital and computer technology-focused initiatives and projects. Like a film director leading a diverse group of professional staff to create a unique and worthwhile film, Cohen directs projects with "a core belief that large-scale initiatives involving technology are actually *social* projects. That is, successful digital projects mainly involve getting diverse people working together towards an ideal" (Enis, 2013). Researching and writing about Cohen shows that diversity can be an asset in accomplishing group projects and tasks rather than an obstacle. Rather than ignoring diversity that exists within an information organization Cohen respects and embraces that diversity knowing that it will lead to creating a better product and service. 

### [LIBR 210 Discussion Post: Underserved Populations](https://mlisefolio.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/libr210_d8_underserved_populations.pdf)

Visual impairment is a significant obstacle to full participation within society and access to information. The visually impaired are an example population that is typically underserved by information organizations. Because so much of what an information organization provides is visual in nature this group can go unnoticed and poorly served. The visually impaired are a diverse population among patrons of an information organization. They deserve service that enables their full participation and access to information just as those without any visual impairment. 

Researching and writing this discussion post demonstrated the need for information organizations and their employees to find ways that will better serve the visually impaired. Supervisors and managers need to recognize this underserved population and ensure that their employees within the organization have all the resources required to provide high quality service to these patrons. This includes the time, money, and tools so that information professionals within the organization can develop the skills and training to acquire, implement, and maintain the resources and technologies that are used by the visually impaired. When an information organization addresses the needs of all in the community with a high level of service these underserved populations can change to being well-served patrons that feel included and a part of the community.

### [LIBR 204 Strategic Planning Project](https://mlisefolio.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/group2_part1_strategicplan_libr204.pdf)

There are many ways for an information organization to improve the organization's "cultural competency" (Evans and Ward, 2007, p. 46). Strategic planning is a key way that employees and leaders of an organization use to set the priorities and focus of the organization. A strategic planning project for LIBR 204 involved creating a strategic plan for an existing public library. This involved researching the library and its community as well as the process of creating a strategic plan.

This research process made clear the need to identify, understand, and embrace the diversity that exists within the public library and its surrounding community.  An information organization that doesn't consider the "…values, attitudes, demographics, historic context, and customs of the society in which the organization operates" (Evans and Ward, 2007, p. 46) will fail to see things as they really are and as they really will be. A failure to see the truth about an organization's cultural context will lead to the organization failing to serve and meet the needs of its employees, patrons, and community which in turn could lead to the end of the organization itself. Understanding and embracing this diversity within an organization's missions, vision, and goals shapes the routine decisions and habits of the organization's staff. One example of this influence is acquisitions and collection development. An information organization that understands the diversity that exists within its patron's and their needs will provide a diverse collection of books, magazines, music, and video that directly meet patron's needs and provide all patrons with the best possible experience.

## Conclusion

A fundamental ideal within library and information science is to provide equal access to information for everyone regardless of the differences that exists within society. Providing society equal access to information is social in nature. This involves working with other professional colleagues and with the organization's clientele in a way that acknowledges, respects, and celebrates their diversity. Working within an environment where diversity of culture, economic status, education, professional skill, and thought are understood, appreciated, and embraced gives expanded perspective and vision that is more empathetic and effective in meeting the needs of the community. Taking the time to interact with and serve others of different cultural, economic, academic, or professional backgrounds is an opportunity to ensure all feel welcomed and empowered for "full participation in a democratic society" (ALA, 2016). Coursework completed in the MLIS program demonstrates the synergy that results in embracing the diversity within information organizations and their clientele. 

## References

ALA (2016). Diversity. In *ALA policy manual* (B.3). <http://www.ala.org/aboutala/governance/policymanual>

Enis, M. (2013, March 12). Q&A: Dan Cohen on his role as the founding executive director of DPLA. *The Digital Shift*. Retrieved from <http://www.thedigitalshift.com/2013/03/digital-libraries/qa-dan-cohen-on-his-role-as-the-founding-executive-director-of-dpla/>

Evans, G. E., & Ward, P. L. (2007). *Management basics for information professionals*. (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Neal Schumann.

Commit message:

Update comp c to include more about economic diversity.

05_competency_c.md, after:

# Competency C

The third core competency is to ["recognize the diversity (such as cultural and economic) in the clientele and employees of an information organization and be familiar with actions the organization should take to address this diversity"](http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies). As technological advancements and societal progress expands our knowledge about the world and its inhabitants one becomes increasingly aware of the diversity that exists in the world. Diversity can be found in various aspects of clientele or employees within a library or information organization. Patrons and employees vary in appearance, physical ability, ethnicity, cultural backgrounds and norms, immigrant status, religious affiliation, gender, education, employment, economic status, and housing. 

In addition to recognizing the diversity that exists within patrons and employees is the need for information organizations to act in ways that help them better understand and reflect this diversity. The [ALA Policy Manual](http://www.ala.org/aboutala/governance/policymanual/updatedpolicymanual/tableofcontents) for diversity states:

"Libraries can and should play a crucial role in empowering diverse populations for full participation in a democratic society. In order to accomplish this, however, libraries must utilize multivariate resources and strategies. In the library workforce, concrete programs of recruitment, training, development, advancement and promotion are needed in order to increase and retain diverse library personnel who are reflective of the society we serve" (ALA, 2016). 

Experiences within the SJSU School of Information MLIS program reinforced the need to recognize and reflect the diversity that exists among an information organization's patrons and employees. A discussion post in LIBR 200 about professional library associations demonstrates an understanding of the value of giving information organizations and information professionals a support network where they can meet others doing similar work but from the context of their own diverse background and circumstances. An essay assignment in LIBR 204 examined qualities of a great leadership by looking at the experience and work of a leader within the library and information profession. Research for this assignment led to understanding that diversity within a team becomes an asset and advantage when the team works towards a unified goal. Helping to meet the needs of blind patrons was the focus of a discussion posting in LIBR 210. This posting shed light on the need to recognize patrons within minority groups and the broader issue of how an information organization can best meet the needs of these underserved populations. A semester-long strategic planning project in LIBR 204 about an existing public library revealed the need for information organizations to develop cultural and ecomomic competency to help them better serve their diverse communities (Evans and Ward, 2007, p. 46).

## Evidence

The following evidence from previous course work demonstrate an understanding of the diversity among patrons and employees of information organizations as well as actions that can be taken by the organization to reflect that diversity.

1. A discussion post about the value of diverse backgrounds and experience coming together within professional associations.
2. An essay about great leadership demonstrating the value of diversity in helping groups accomplish great things.
3. A discussion posting about meeting the needs of underserved populations. 
4. A strategic planning project showing the diversity within a public library.

### [LIBR 200 Discussion post: Professional Library Associations](https://mlisefolio.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/libr202_d5_library_associations.pdf)

Professional Library Associations give information professionals an opportunity to join a community where they can share ideas, solutions, best practices, job experiences, and job openings. Researching about these associations and writing a discussion post on the research findings demonstrates the diversity present in a professional association and how this diversity can lead to improving everyone. Although the community shares a similar set of professional interests and pursuits the network of information professionals come from diverse cultural and economic backgrounds. Associating with information professionals from diverse backgrounds and settings gives opportunities to learn from each other and see new perspectives that were previously unknown or unfamiliar. Information organizations can encourage their employees to join and participate in a professional library association. This encouragement promotes the value and benefits of diversity to the organization's employees and its surrounding community by ensuring more broadly skilled and trained professionals who effectively serve the needs of the community.

### [LIBR 204 Essay: Good to Great](https://mlisefolio.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/c_reeve_good_to_great.pdf)

An information organization faces the challenge of uniting a diverse group of professionals around a shared vision all can support and trust. Great leaders exhibit the qualities that unite a team or organization around a common purpose and vision. They put the mission of the organization first before themselves or anything else. This assignment looked at the leadership qualities exhibited by Daniel J. Cohen the current executive director of the [Digital Public Library of America (DPLA)](http://www.dp.la).

Cohen has spent most of his professional career on digital and computer technology-focused initiatives and projects. Like a film director leading a diverse group of professional staff to create a unique and worthwhile film, Cohen directs projects with "a core belief that large-scale initiatives involving technology are actually *social* projects. That is, successful digital projects mainly involve getting diverse people working together towards an ideal" (Enis, 2013). Researching and writing about Cohen shows that diversity can be an asset in accomplishing group projects and tasks rather than an obstacle. Rather than ignoring diversity that exists within an information organization Cohen respects and embraces that diversity knowing that it will lead to creating a better product and service. 

### [LIBR 210 Discussion Post: Underserved Populations](https://mlisefolio.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/libr210_d8_underserved_populations.pdf)

Visual impairment is a significant obstacle to full participation within society and access to information. The visually impaired are an example population that is typically underserved by information organizations. Because so much of what an information organization provides is visual in nature this group can go unnoticed and poorly served. The visually impaired are a diverse population among patrons of an information organization. They deserve service that enables their full participation and access to information just as those without any visual impairment. 

Researching and writing this discussion post demonstrated the need for information organizations and their employees to find ways that will better serve the visually impaired. Supervisors and managers need to recognize this underserved population and ensure that their employees within the organization have all the resources required to provide high quality service to these patrons. This includes the time, money, and tools so that information professionals within the organization can develop the skills and training to acquire, implement, and maintain the resources and technologies that are used by the visually impaired. When an information organization addresses the needs of all in the community with a high level of service these underserved populations can change to being well-served patrons that feel included and a part of the community.

### [LIBR 204 Strategic Planning Project](https://mlisefolio.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/group2_part1_strategicplan_libr204.pdf)

There are many ways for an information organization to improve the organization's "cultural competency" (Evans and Ward, 2007, p. 46). Strategic planning is a key way that employees and leaders of an organization use to set the priorities and focus of the organization. A strategic planning project for LIBR 204 involved creating a strategic plan for an existing public library. This involved researching the library and its community as well as the process of creating a strategic plan.

This research process made clear the need to identify, understand, and embrace the diversity that exists within the public library and its surrounding community. An information organization that doesn't consider the "…values, attitudes, demographics, historic context, and customs of the society in which the organization operates" (Evans and Ward, 2007, p. 46) will fail to see things as they really are and as they really will be. A failure to see the truth about an organization's cultural and economic contexts will lead to the organization failing to serve and meet the needs of its employees, patrons, and community which in turn could lead to the end of the organization itself. Understanding and embracing this diversity within an organization's missions, vision, and goals shapes the routine decisions and habits of the organization's staff. One example of this influence is acquisitions and collection development. An information organization that understands the diversity that exists within its patron's and their needs will provide a diverse collection of books, magazines, music, and video that directly meet patron's needs and provide all patrons with the best possible experience. Another example is understanding the economic situation of the library's local community. Like the Hingham Public Library many information organizations are part of a local community with unemployed or low income workers. An information organization can better serve these economically diverse patron groups by offering programs and services that help them find jobs and improve their employable work skills. 

## Conclusion

A fundamental ideal within library and information science is to provide equal access to information for everyone regardless of the differences that exists within society. Providing society equal access to information is social in nature. This involves working with other professional colleagues and with the organization's clientele in a way that acknowledges, respects, and celebrates their diversity. Working within an environment where diversity of culture, economic status, education, professional skill, and thought are understood, appreciated, and embraced gives expanded perspective and vision that is more empathetic and effective in meeting the needs of the community. Taking the time to interact with and serve others of different cultural, economic, academic, or professional backgrounds is an opportunity to ensure all feel welcomed and empowered for "full participation in a democratic society" (ALA, 2016). Coursework completed in the MLIS program demonstrates the synergy that results in embracing the diversity within information organizations and their clientele. 

## References

ALA (2016). Diversity. In *ALA policy manual* (B.3). <http://www.ala.org/aboutala/governance/policymanual>

Enis, M. (2013, March 12). Q&A: Dan Cohen on his role as the founding executive director of DPLA. *The Digital Shift*. Retrieved from <http://www.thedigitalshift.com/2013/03/digital-libraries/qa-dan-cohen-on-his-role-as-the-founding-executive-director-of-dpla/>

Evans, G. E., & Ward, P. L. (2007). *Management basics for information professionals*. (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Neal Schumann.
