08_competency_f.md, before:

# Competency F

The sixth competency in the SJSU iSchool MLIS program is to ["use the basic concepts and principles related to the selection, evaluation, organization, and preservation of physical and digital information items"](http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies). Information organizations select, evaluate, organize, and preserve physical and digital information items for a variety of reasons depending on the mission and aims of the organization. For example, an archive or special collection will select, evaluate, organize, and preserve materials with a different focus and set of priorities than a library. Archives and special collections hold materials that are unique, rare, or specialized with the intent to make the materials available in the present as well as for future students and researchers. Libraries collect and hold materials to make materials available for use by their patrons. If a library item is worn out through patron use a new copy is purchased. Archives and special collections don't always have that luxury as items in the collection may not be available for purchase and replacement. 

With the rise of computer and network technologies there is an increase in the storage and use of digital information items. While there is an increase in the creation of digital data (either born-digital or analog items converted to digital formats) the effective selection, evaluation, organization, and preservation of this data is achieved by following fundamental concepts that are independent of the item's format. An organization's laws, policies, standards, practices, systems, technologies, management, leadership teams, staff, and clientele all work together to either support or hinder the use and handling of information items (McDonald, 2005, p. 3). Effective application of these concepts also requires knowing as much about the information items as possible including their historical context, condition, and value. There are also legal and copyright ramifications to the management of information items including how society views these information items and what is considered an authentic information item particularly in the digital world. Information item management can be represented "as the process of managing the corporate memory in a way that makes trustworthy records readily accessible any time they are required" (Stephens, 2005, p. 111). 

The selection process of physical or digital items for an information organization is constrained by a variety of factors including budget, space, the organization's aims, the organization's collecting policy, collection levels, library cooperation, item availability, patron use, and reaching non-patrons. The main focus of selection is ensuring the materials meet the needs of the organization's clientele and patrons. Evaluation is about judging the inherent quality and worthiness of a material considered for inclusion in an organization (Katz, 1980, p. 89). Organizing materials so that they are "arranged, described, and made available in a suitable reference environment" (Cox, 1992, p. 117) is key to ensuring that the items will be utilized by the organization's clientele or patrons. Organization of materials includes cataloging and locating the items where they can be easily retrieved and used by an organization's staff and patrons. This includes creating accurate and complete metadata about the item so that both physical and digital retrieval and use are most efficient. Preservation is important in ensuring that materials are available for retrieval and use by an organization's clientele or patrons both in the present as well as into the future. Preservation includes both restoration and conservation. Restoration seeks to bring back an item as close as possible to its original condition. Conservation is concerned with protecting and treating an item so that it doesn't degrade over time and use (Cox, 1992, p. 86). Coursework and projects in the SJSU MLIS program provided opportunities to use the basic concepts and principles related to selection, evaluation, organization, and preservation of both physical and digital information items. 

## Evidence

1. Annotated bibliography about Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
2. Discussion post about digital preservation
3. INFO 280 manuscript/book projects (evaluation)
4. LIBR 246 digital library website analysis

### [LIBR 210: Annotated Bibliography](http://greeve.github.io/lib/biblio/gis/)

This assignment required creating an annotated bibliography. An annotated bibliography is an organized list of bibliographic entries for information items with a brief description and assessment to justify including the item in a library collection. The annotated bibliogrpahy can be used by staff of an information organization to guide their collection development decisions so that the organization better serves the needs of its patrons or clientele. 

Choosing the scope of the bibliography was the first step in the project. The scope established constraints for the bibliography that included the subject area, target audience or organization, purpose, and year published. This bibliography was limited to information items related to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) that would help reference staff in an academic library answer students' and faculty's GIS-related information needs. All items in the bibliography had to be published no later than 2009 to ensure the currency of the materials in connection with current technology trends. 

Once the scope of the bibliography was in place the next step included finding information items related to GIS. Finding GIS-related items included performing numerous searches using web search engines, online book retailers, and various library databases and indexes. The scope of the bibliography was like a lense to help focus in on the most relevant items and help filter out items that were not as helpful. Without a clearly defined scope the bibliography's accuracy and direction would be dilluted and untrustworthy, lacking focus and direction. Discovered items were selected to be included based on their evaluation against the scope and purpose of the bibliography. If an item didn't fall within the parameters of the scope then the item wasn't included in the bibliography. Part of item selection included identifying the item type, purpose, content, and subject. Gathering as much information about the item was essential to understanding the item enough to know how it compared against the bibliography's scope.  

After 20 items were chosen the items were organized into categories by item type. The following three categories were created based on the items selected: 1) books, 2) online resources, and 3) scholarly journals and databases. These categories were created by looking at the material type of each item in the list. After the items were selected, evaluated, and organized they were listed on a website that included each item's bibliographic entry in APA format along with the item's description and assessment statements. The website listed items by category and provided an interface to quickly scan each category and item. This project provided first-hand experience with selection, evaluation, and organization of information items for an information organization. 

### [INFO 220 Discussion Post: Digital Preservation]() 

- D7

### [INFO 280 Manuscript and Printed Book Projects]()

### [LIBR 246 Digital Library Website Analysis]()

## Conclusion

## References

Cox, R. J. (1992). *Managing institutional archives: Foundational principles and practices*. New York: Greenwood Press.

Katz, W. A. (1980). *Collection development: The selection of materials for libraries*. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

McDonald, J. (2005). The wild frontier ten years on. In J. McLeod & C. Hare (Eds.), *Managing electronic records* (p. 1-17). London: Facet Publishing.

Stephens, D. O. (2005). Legal issues. In J. McLeod & C. Hare (Eds.), *Managing electronic records* (p. 101-114). London: Facet Publishing.

Commit message:

Continue to work on evidence for comp f

08_competency_f.md, after:

# Competency F

The sixth competency in the SJSU iSchool MLIS program is to ["use the basic concepts and principles related to the selection, evaluation, organization, and preservation of physical and digital information items"](http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies). Information organizations select, evaluate, organize, and preserve physical and digital information items for a variety of reasons depending on the mission and aims of the organization. For example, an archive or special collection will select, evaluate, organize, and preserve materials with a different focus and set of priorities than a library. Archives and special collections hold materials that are unique, rare, or specialized with the intent to make the materials available in the present as well as for future students and researchers. Libraries collect and hold materials to make materials available for use by their patrons. If a library item is worn out through patron use a new copy is purchased. Archives and special collections don't always have that luxury as items in the collection may not be available for purchase and replacement. 

With the rise of computer and network technologies there is an increase in the storage and use of digital information items. While there is an increase in the creation of digital data (either born-digital or analog items converted to digital formats) the effective selection, evaluation, organization, and preservation of this data is achieved by following fundamental concepts that are independent of the item's format. An organization's laws, policies, standards, practices, systems, technologies, management, leadership teams, staff, and clientele all work together to either support or hinder the use and handling of information items (McDonald, 2005, p. 3). Effective application of these concepts also requires knowing as much about the information items as possible including their historical context, condition, and value. There are also legal and copyright ramifications to the management of information items including how society views these information items and what is considered an authentic information item particularly in the digital world. Information item management can be represented "as the process of managing the corporate memory in a way that makes trustworthy records readily accessible any time they are required" (Stephens, 2005, p. 111). 

The selection process of physical or digital items for an information organization is constrained by a variety of factors including budget, space, the organization's aims, the organization's collecting policy, collection levels, library cooperation, item availability, patron use, and reaching non-patrons. The main focus of selection is ensuring the materials meet the needs of the organization's clientele and patrons. Evaluation is about judging the inherent quality and worthiness of a material considered for inclusion in an organization (Katz, 1980, p. 89). Organizing materials so that they are "arranged, described, and made available in a suitable reference environment" (Cox, 1992, p. 117) is key to ensuring that the items will be utilized by the organization's clientele or patrons. Organization of materials includes cataloging and locating the items where they can be easily retrieved and used by an organization's staff and patrons. This includes creating accurate and complete metadata about the item so that both physical and digital retrieval and use are most efficient. Preservation is important in ensuring that materials are available for retrieval and use by an organization's clientele or patrons both in the present as well as into the future. Preservation includes both restoration and conservation. Restoration seeks to bring back an item as close as possible to its original condition. Conservation is concerned with protecting and treating an item so that it doesn't degrade over time and use (Cox, 1992, p. 86). Coursework and projects in the SJSU MLIS program provided opportunities to use the basic concepts and principles related to selection, evaluation, organization, and preservation of both physical and digital information items. 

## Evidence

1. Annotated bibliography about Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
2. Discussion post about digital preservation
3. INFO 280 manuscript/book projects (evaluation)
4. LIBR 246 digital library website analysis

### [LIBR 210: Annotated Bibliography](http://greeve.github.io/lib/biblio/gis/)

This assignment required creating an annotated bibliography. An annotated bibliography is an organized list of bibliographic entries for information items with a brief description and assessment to justify including the item in a library collection. The annotated bibliography can be used by staff of an information organization to guide their collection development decisions so that the organization better serves the needs of its patrons or clientele. 

Choosing the scope of the bibliography was the first step in the project. The scope established constraints for the bibliography that included the subject area, target audience or organization, purpose, and year published. This bibliography was limited to information items related to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) that would help reference staff in an academic library answer students' and faculty's GIS-related information needs. All items in the bibliography had to be published no later than 2009 to ensure the currency of the materials in connection with current technology trends. 

Once the scope of the bibliography was in place the next step included finding information items related to GIS. Finding GIS-related items included performing numerous searches using web search engines, online book retailers, and various library databases and indexes. The scope of the bibliography was like a lens to help focus in on the most relevant items and help filter out items that were not as helpful. Without a clearly defined scope the bibliography's accuracy and direction would be diluted and untrustworthy, lacking focus and direction. Discovered items were selected to be included based on their evaluation against the scope and purpose of the bibliography. If an item didn't fall within the parameters of the scope then the item wasn't included in the bibliography. Part of item selection included identifying the item type, purpose, content, and subject. Gathering as much information about the item was essential to understanding the item enough to know how it compared against the bibliography's scope. This included understanding the item's cost, availability, critical reviews, format, authority and scholarly appropriateness, and ease of use. 

After 20 items were chosen the items were organized into categories by item type. The following three categories were created based on the items selected: 1) books, 2) online resources, and 3) scholarly journals and databases. These categories were created by looking at the material type of each item in the list. After the items were selected, evaluated, and organized they were listed on a website that included each item's bibliographic entry in APA format along with the item's description and assessment statements. The website listed items by category and provided an interface to quickly scan each category and item. This project provided first-hand experience with selection, evaluation, and organization of information items for an information organization. 

### [INFO 220 Discussion Post: Digital Preservation]() 

A discussion post in a class about Digital Humanities (DH) addressed the issue of digital preservation. DH and the digital humanist is interested in almost all of things generated by humans. We live in a time where massive quantities of data are being created and communicated daily in a variety of media, formats, and protocols. The disscussion post answered the following two questions: 1) Are we facing the greatest age of loss? and 2) What are your thoughts on best practices for digital preservation moving into the future?

If "age of loss" is defined as not being able to preserve everything then the history of human society has been one long "age of loss". Although a seeminly noble and altruistic goal it seems virtually impossible to preserve everything. The question isn't about whether we are preserving everything or not but rather what should the preservation focus and attention be of the librarian or information scientist. With the resources of time, money, and energy that do exist what can be preserved? This seems to be a more realistic and approachable question to answer. Digital preservation is particularly challenging as digital data is easily lost and ephemeral. Digital formats and technologies rapidly change and evolve over time making it a moving target for preservationists to capture and save. Digital preservation is also very expensive as the quantity and quality of storage media increases. Preserving items in digital format doesn't reduce cost but most likely increases it. Despite the challenges the argument can be made that it is worth the effort:

> "Data is fragile and needs to be stewarded in the 'cyberworld' just like we need to take care of rain forests and the environment in the physical world. Preserving valued data in the information age is fundamental to ensure that it will continue to inform and enrich our world for the foreseeable future" (Library of Congress, 2016). 

Computing technologies will continue to improve and reduce in cost. What was possible techincally 20 years previously has radically changed compared to the present state of digital and computing technologies. The real challenge in digital preservation isn't technical in nature but rather a challenge of resources: time, money, and personnel. 

### [INFO 280 Manuscript and Printed Book Projects]()

Fundamental to any preservation work is deeply understanding the nature of the item that is considered for preservation. Two projects that examined and evaluated a medieval manuscript and printed book gave deep experience and understanding of this preservation principle. 

### [LIBR 246 Digital Library Website Analysis]()

## Conclusion

## References

Cox, R. J. (1992). *Managing institutional archives: Foundational principles and practices*. New York: Greenwood Press.

Katz, W. A. (1980). *Collection development: The selection of materials for libraries*. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Library of Congress. (2016). *Fran Berman: Digital preservation pioneer*. Retrieved from <http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/series/pioneers/berman.html>

McDonald, J. (2005). The wild frontier ten years on. In J. McLeod & C. Hare (Eds.), *Managing electronic records* (p. 1-17). London: Facet Publishing.

Stephens, D. O. (2005). Legal issues. In J. McLeod & C. Hare (Eds.), *Managing electronic records* (p. 101-114). London: Facet Publishing.
