12_competency_j.md, before:

# Competency J

The tenth competency in the SJSU iSchool MLIS program is to ["describe the fundamental concepts of information-seeking behaviors"](http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies). Information seeking and information behavior are terms referring to human behavior that is so fundamental and commonplace that it can easily go unnoticed. These terms refer to the "common human cycle of needing, looking for, choosing, and using information of some kind" (Case, 2008, p. 35). Assessing an individual's information need and helping individuals meet those needs is part of the role of a librarian or information scientist. 

Information seeking behaviors begin with the information user or patron and their information need (Wilson, 1981). The patron recognizes that their knowledge and understanding about a subject is inadequate to achieve some result or goal. They tend to seek out informal reference sources more often than formal sources and will be satisfied with the first appropriate solution to their query rather than trying to find the best answer. Quality is often sacrificed for expediency and convenience (Rubin, 2016, p. 378; Case, 2008, p. 37-38). The information needs of individuals vary across these strata and occur within specific contexts both internal (e.g. memories, thoughts, motivations, and personality) and external (e.g. profession, family, and friends). The information seeking process is organic and can change between information queries as well as during the information seeking process. It "is rarely a simple, linear process that comes to complete fruition" (Case, 2008, p. 40). 

Information seeking behaviors are studied from a variety of perspectives including employment, role within society, and demographics (Rubin, 2016, p. 373). Many researchers have identified various ways to model information seeking. One study represented the information seeking process as six stages: initiation, selection, exploration, formulation, collection, and presentation (Kuhlthau, 1991, p. 367). Other models attempt to describe the relationship between communication, information seeking, information behavior, and information searching (Wilson, 1999). The rise of computer and internet technologies have made a major impact on individuals' information seeking behaviors. The World Wide Web (WWW) provides access to massive amounts of information and creates new ways of information searching and seeking. The WWW's chaotic and changing nature add complexity to the information seeking process. Seeking and searching for information on the WWW is a fluid, dynamic process where individuals use multiple search techniques within various contexts to find answers to their information queries.

## Evidence

The following coursework completed within the SJSU MLIS program demonstrates an understanding of the concepts of information seeking behaviors. 

1. Discussion post about meeting user information needs
2. Essay on information seeking behaviors
3. Research paper on Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
4. EAD Finding Aids search project

### [LIBR 200 Discussion Post: Meeting Patron Information Needs]()

A discussion post asks whether a librarian should serve the needs of the patrons rather than the patrons' wants. Put in other words: Should a librarian be popular or right? The discussion post answer states that being right would be preferred to being popular. A patron may not recognize for themselves their exact information need. "Merely answering a patron’s question might not be enough; the individual might want a particular piece of information, only to discover that something different is needed" (Rubin, 2010, p. 275). Finding information is not usually the problem. With more electronic information resources available to more people the quantity of information is not an issue. The issue is in the quality of the data in answering the information need. "For most of the situations [librarians and information scientists] face there is not a problem getting enough information but rather with interpreting and understanding what information we already have" (Case, 2008, 40). This is the role that the information professional plays in understanding the information seeking behaviors of their patrons. If the information professional understands the information seeking behaviors of their patrons they will be able to provide more effective service in meeting their needs. They are positioned to help filter and guide patrons and clientele to sources of information that meet their information needs and in this process show patrons how they can find answers for themselves. 

### [LIBR 202 Essay: Information Seeking Behaviors]() 

Family history research is the study of families by identifying family lineage and history.

An essay for an information retrieval course (LIBR 202) anaylzed the information seeking behaviors of family history researchers (FHRs).

### [LIBR 202 Research Paper: Geographic Information Systems (GIS)]()

### [INFO 244 Final Project: EAD Finding Aids and Search]()

## Conclusion

- Deluge of information in today's interconnected society. 
- Librarians and information scientists here to help sift through the information to help identify sources and information that matters. 

Wilson, 1981

The result of a more truly user-oriented, innovative, experimental information profession should be a reduction in the marginality of information service. Scientific research generally recognizes the significance of services which provide access to the external research literature, but when such services are adopted by different kinds of organization with little or no adaptation in the light of a proper analysis of the needs of users or of their relationship with organizational communication systems, information services become increasingly marginal to the organization's functioning. Evidence for this can be found in industry, where, when economic pressures have been intense, numerous special libraries and information systems have been abolished or subject to severe staff redundancies.

## References

Case, D. O. (2008). Information seeking. In K. Haycock & B. E. Sheldon (Eds.), *The portable MLIS: Insights form the experts*. (p. 35-41). Westport, Connecticut: Libraries Unlimited.

Kuhlthau, C. C. (1991). Inside the search process: Information seeking from the user's perspective. *Journal of the American Society for Information Science*, *42*(5), 361-371.

Rubin, R. E. (2016). *Foundations of library and information science*. Chicago: Neal-Schuman.

Wilson, T. D. (1981). On user studies and information needs. *Journal of Documentation*, *37*(1), 3-15. Retrieved from http://informationr.net/tdw/publ/papers/1981infoneeds.html

Wilson, T. D. (1999). Models in information behaviour research. *Journal of Documentation*, *55*(3), 249-270. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/EUM0000000007145

Commit message:

Finish another piece of evidence for comp j

12_competency_j.md, after:

# Competency J

The tenth competency in the SJSU iSchool MLIS program is to ["describe the fundamental concepts of information-seeking behaviors"](http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies). Information seeking and information behavior are terms referring to human behavior that is so fundamental and commonplace that it can easily go unnoticed. These terms refer to the "common human cycle of needing, looking for, choosing, and using information of some kind" (Case, 2008, p. 35). Assessing an individual's information need and helping individuals meet those needs is part of the role of a librarian or information scientist. 

Information seeking behaviors begin with the information user or patron and their information need (Wilson, 1981). The patron recognizes that their knowledge and understanding about a subject is inadequate to achieve some result or goal. They tend to seek out informal reference sources more often than formal sources and will be satisfied with the first appropriate solution to their query rather than trying to find the best answer. Quality is often sacrificed for expediency and convenience (Rubin, 2016, p. 378; Case, 2008, p. 37-38). The information needs of individuals vary across these strata and occur within specific contexts both internal (e.g. memories, thoughts, motivations, and personality) and external (e.g. profession, family, and friends). The information seeking process is organic and can change between information queries as well as during the information seeking process. It "is rarely a simple, linear process that comes to complete fruition" (Case, 2008, p. 40). 

Information seeking behaviors are studied from a variety of perspectives including employment, role within society, and demographics (Rubin, 2016, p. 373). Many researchers have identified various ways to model information seeking. One study represented the information seeking process as six stages: initiation, selection, exploration, formulation, collection, and presentation (Kuhlthau, 1991, p. 367). Other models attempt to describe the relationship between communication, information seeking, information behavior, and information searching (Wilson, 1999). The rise of computer and internet technologies have made a major impact on individuals' information seeking behaviors. The World Wide Web (WWW) provides access to massive amounts of information and creates new ways of information searching and seeking. The WWW's chaotic and changing nature add complexity to the information seeking process. Seeking and searching for information on the WWW is a fluid, dynamic process where individuals use multiple search techniques within various contexts to find answers to their information queries.

## Evidence

The following coursework completed within the SJSU MLIS program demonstrates an understanding of the concepts of information seeking behaviors. 

1. Discussion post about meeting user information needs
2. Essay on information seeking behaviors
3. Research paper on Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
4. EAD Finding Aids search project

### [LIBR 200 Discussion Post: Meeting Patron Information Needs]()

A discussion post asks whether a librarian should serve the needs of the patrons rather than the patrons' wants. Put in other words: Should a librarian be popular or right? The discussion post answer states that being right would be preferred to being popular. A patron may not recognize for themselves their exact information need. "Merely answering a patron’s question might not be enough; the individual might want a particular piece of information, only to discover that something different is needed" (Rubin, 2010, p. 275). Finding information is not usually the problem. With more electronic information resources available to more people the quantity of information is not an issue. The issue is in the quality of the data in answering the information need. "For most of the situations [librarians and information scientists] face there is not a problem getting enough information but rather with interpreting and understanding what information we already have" (Case, 2008, 40). This is the role that the information professional plays in understanding the information seeking behaviors of their patrons. If the information professional understands the information seeking behaviors of their patrons they will be able to provide more effective service in meeting their needs. They are positioned to help filter and guide patrons and clientele to sources of information that meet their information needs and in this process show patrons how they can find answers for themselves. 

### [LIBR 202 Essay: Information Seeking Behaviors]() 

Family history research is the study of families by identifying family lineage and history. An essay for an information retrieval course (LIBR 202) analyzed the information seeking behaviors of family history researchers (FHRs). FHRs conduct research within both professional and amateur contexts. They have unique motivations and interests for the information they seek. The information seeking behavior of FHRs is a long term, lifelong approach "carried out sporadically yet intensively" (Darby & Clough, 2013, p. 75). FHR is conducted over an eclectic range of information resources and resource types that can reveal names, birth and death locations and dates, marriage location and date, stories, and photographs about their ancestors. The focus of FHRs is on names first, geographic locations second, and lastly dates Darby & Clough, 2013, p. 74). Information sharing among peers is another unique aspect of FHRs that leads to a strengthened personal understanding of information seeking tools and techniques, advancement of personal FHR and the advancement of peers' FHR. This essay demonstrates that not all user groups and individuals follow the same information seeking behaviors. The information seeking behavior of individuals and groups can be closely connected to the context and setting for the information being sought.

### [LIBR 202 Research Paper: Geographic Information Systems (GIS)]()

### [INFO 244 Final Project: EAD Finding Aids and Search]()

## Conclusion

- Deluge of information in today's interconnected society. 
- Librarians and information scientists here to help sift through the information to help identify sources and information that matters. 

- models of seeking behavior to explain the causes for how one seeks (analytic) vs. the process taking in searching (summary) (Järvelin)

- ISB is dynamic and multiple strategies and models are used to find information (Xie)
- There is a wide variety of search models and information seeking behaviors identified. There may not be a one-size-fits-all [universal] model to account for all issues in the search and information retrieval process (Xie)

Wilson, 1981

The result of a more truly user-oriented, innovative, experimental information profession should be a reduction in the marginality of information service. Scientific research generally recognizes the significance of services which provide access to the external research literature, but when such services are adopted by different kinds of organization with little or no adaptation in the light of a proper analysis of the needs of users or of their relationship with organizational communication systems, information services become increasingly marginal to the organization's functioning. Evidence for this can be found in industry, where, when economic pressures have been intense, numerous special libraries and information systems have been abolished or subject to severe staff redundancies.

## References

Case, D. O. (2008). Information seeking. In K. Haycock & B. E. Sheldon (Eds.), *The portable MLIS: Insights form the experts*. (p. 35-41). Westport, Connecticut: Libraries Unlimited.

Darby, P. & Clough, P. (2013). Investigating the information-seeking behaviour of genealogists and family historians. *Journal of Information Science*, *39*(1), 73-84. doi: 10.1177/0165551512469765

Kuhlthau, C. C. (1991). Inside the search process: Information seeking from the user's perspective. *Journal of the American Society for Information Science*, *42*(5), 361-371.

Järvelin, K. and Wilson, T. D. (2003). On conceptual models for information seeking and retrieval research. *Information Research*, *9*(1). Retrieved from <http://www.informationr.net/ir/9-1/paper163.html>

Rubin, R. E. (2016). *Foundations of library and information science*. Chicago: Neal-Schuman.

Wilson, T. D. (1981). On user studies and information needs. *Journal of Documentation*, *37*(1), 3-15. Retrieved from http://informationr.net/tdw/publ/papers/1981infoneeds.html

Wilson, T. D. (1999). Models in information behaviour research. *Journal of Documentation*, *55*(3), 249-270. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/EUM0000000007145

Xie I. (2012). Information searching and search models. In Bates M. (ed.) *Understanding information retrieval systems*. (p. 31-46). Abingdon: Taylor & Francis.
