# Competency L

## Introduction

The twelfth competency in the SJSU iSchool MLIS program is to ["demonstrate understanding of quantitative and qualitative research methods, the ability to design a research project, and the ability to evaluate and synthesize research literature"](http://ischool.sjsu.edu/current-students/courses/core-competencies).

Research is a rigorous, systematic process that examines and studies information to expand or apply human knowledge. Research has been classified into two main methods: basic and applied (National Science Foundation, 1953, p. 38). Basic research is "concerned with creating new, generalizable knowledge" while applied research is "concerned with the solving of specific problems in real situations" (Powell, 2008, p. 169). One type is focused on creating new theories and knowledge that can be broadly applied. The other is focused on discovering applications of the general theories and knowledge. Basic and applied research can be better understood by comparing research to trees: basic research is the broad trunk of the tree while applied research is the leaves at the tips of the branches (Brady, 2015). This implies that these two methods are seen as a continuum or spectrum. Research can fall somewhere between the two types of research rather than a binary categorization. Both types of research can feed into the other. Basic and applied research can also be either quantitative or qualitative in nature or some combination of the two. A quantitative approach means that the research is measurable using numerical means. A qualitative approach means that the research is focused on characteristics, qualities, events, and behaviors of the subject (or subjects) involved in the research.

While ideas for research questions and projects can come from various sources a common source comes from critical evaluation and synthesis of existing research literature. Using the results of research projects is limited if a librarian or information scientist lacks the ability to critically evaluate existing research projects (Powell, 2008, p. 177). Once a research topic and methodology are chosen the next step is designing a project that will help answer the original research questions. This will include determining the best method for capturing data that will help answer the research question. Research methods and techniques used to gather data include surveys, experiments, history and historical primary sources, case studies, focus groups, content analyses, bibliometrics, ethnography, grounded theory, phenomenology, hermeneutics, reflexivity, and discourse analysis. After data is collected that helps answer the original research question the data is analyzed. Data analysis includes organizing, summarizing, and generalizing the collected data to help identify patterns and draw conclusions. After the data is analyzed and summarized the researcher reports the research project's findings in some form of a report that can be communicated to individuals or groups with an interest in the results. Coursework completed in the SJSU MLIS program provided experience with these research concepts and processes. 

## Evidence

The following coursework demonstrates an understanding of quantiative and qualitative research methods, the ability to design a research project, and the ability to evaluate and synthesize research literature.

1. INFO 285 Literature Review
2. INFO 285 Research methods critique
3. INFO 285 Research Project Proposal

### [INFO 285 Literature Review](media/info285_literature_review_2.pdf) 

A literature review is the product of evaluating and synthesizing published information about a given subject area. By definition it is a secondary source. It doesn't add any new ideas but summarizes and synthesizes existing research and literature on a given subject. The organization and presentation of the literature review can vary but is centered around a particular research topic. The selected topic is used to search for sources related to the research topic. The literature review can be organized chronologically, methodologically, or thematically. The choice of organizational method depends upon the type and purpose of the literature review. A well constructed literature review explains why the review is being conducted. The body of the review can identify general trends, conflicts, gaps of research, or new perspectives in the related field.  

To prepare for writing a research project proposal a library research methods course (INFO 285) required writing a literature review. Successfully writing this literature review required clearly defining the research question. The research question for this literature review is to evaluate and assess whether the electronic finding aid interface for the L. Tom Perry Special Collections in the Harold B. Lee Library (HBLL) at Brigham Young University (BYU) is meeting the needs of its patrons. The literature review explored this study question by looking at literature related to the display of electronic archival finding aids. Basic characteristics of all the sources was enumerated including how many years the research spanned, the methodologies taken by the research, and the statistical approaches of any research projects in the literature. After this introduction to the literature major themes are discussed that were discovered while evaluating each source. These themes included user groups, display elements, navigation and search, and content standards. After discussing these themes the conclusion highlights disagreement and gaps in the literature that present opportunities for further research and study. This assignment is evidence of learning how to evaluate and synthesize research literature. 

### [INFO 285: Research Methods Critique](media/info285_research_critique.pdf)

Not all research studies are of equal value. The ability to critically evaluate a research study is a key part of understanding and applying principles and practices that will positively contribute to a given research domain (Boswell and Cannon, 2009, p. 292). As part of a larger effort in a library research methods course (INFO 285) a critique of an existing research study was written that related to a research project proposal. The research topic was about assessing the interface and display of electronic archival finding aids. The critique focused on the published results of a usability study aimed to assess the display of electronic archival finding aids at the Southern Historical Collection (Chapman, 2010). The rubric for critically assessing this study comes from criteria identified by Boswell and Cannon (2009). The critique examined the research study's report form, purpose, literature review, research questions, methodology, and results. The critique of the published research study reveals Chapman's assumptions, definitions, strengths, and limitations. 

Comparing the research study with the criteria enumerated by Boswell and Cannon (2009) reveals that the report writing lacks consistency and clarity. The purpose for the research is clearly defined as the researcher hopes that their study, combined with past studies, will increase the overall knowledge and understanding of library and information scientists related to electronic archival finding aid displays. Despite being exhaustive in quantity and quality of reviewed research, the literature review lacks direction and focus toward the research study's purpose. Research questions the researcher poses aren't clearly linked to the rest of the report making it unsure where the questions came from that are driving the research project. The origins and reasons for the research study's design and methodology are not clearly explained. The study's reports and recommendations fall short in that they are presented as though the results from this study can apply to other archives and special collections organizations but the research and statistical methods used in the study lack the robustness required to be able to make generalizations about the results. Using a standard rubric for evaluating and critiquing research studies helps to objectively identify a study's strengths and weaknesses. This research methods critique demonstrates the ability to understand qualitative and quantitative research methods as well as evaluate research literature. 

### [INFO 285 Research Project Proposal](media/info285_final.pdf)

Research proposals are intended to persuade other scholars that are part of another committee or organization that the proposed research study contains the qualities of "conceptual innovation, methodological rigor, and rich, substantive content" (Przeworski and Salomon, 1995, p. 1). The proposal should answer 1) what will be learned from the research study, 2) why does the study matter, and 3) how can one know to trust the results (Przeworski and Salomon, 1995, p. 2). A class teaching research methods (INFO 285) that focused on library evaluation and assessment required creating a research project proposal that would evaluate and assess some program or aspect of a library. This research project proposal focused on evaluating and assessing the electronic archival finding aid interface and display for the L. Tom Perry Special Collections in the Harold B. Lee Library (HBLL) at Brigham Young University (BYU). The library's finding aid interface was redesigned almost eight years previously. This project proposal would request support to evaluate and assess whether the current finding aid display meets the needs of patrons to the library. 

This final project was a semester-long effort tying together concepts related to library evaluation and assessment, research methods, and statistical analyses. A literature review and research study critique were assigned and completed as part of the preparation for completing this final project. Writing this proposal taught many practical things about the nature of a project proposal as compared to other types of written reports and literature. An example difference between writing a research proposal and other scholarly research literature is the audience for this proposal. This proposal is written for the approval of a committee of scholars who decide whether or not to fund the project. This difference in audience is manifest in the use of an executive summary rather than an abstract. The executive summary is the summation of the report and is more lengthly than a typical article abstract.

This project teaches the truth that a good research proposal starts with a clearly defined (and refined) research question. This sets the tone and focus of the entire proposal including the literature review, research design, methodology, and analysis. The proposal also taught about the importance of choosing the research and statistical methods that would be used in the study. This proposal relies upon both qualitative and quantitative methods. Surveys are used to gather information about the effectiveness of the current electronic archival finding aid interface. The information from the surveys is encoded so that a quantitative analysis can be performed on the gathered data.  

Ethical issues related to a research study proposal were also learned from this project. Since the proposed study involves human subjects the project required receiving training and certification through the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI program). This training would be required as a pre-requisite to receiving approval from an institutional review board (IRB). The IRB is meant to evaluate (using a risk-benefit analysis) whether or not the research study should be conducted. Also related to the ethics of a research study involving human subjects is the requirement of a consent form for participants to sign. The consent form clarifies what it means to participate in the study.

The design of the research study requires a clear understanding of the research question and purpose for the study. The questions that are asked determine the data that needs to be collected. The research proposal also requires understanding research study methodologies (e.g. survey, experiment, case studies, focus groups, content analysis, bibliometrics, ethnography) and identifying whether a method is qualitative or quantitative in nature or the combination of both. There is also a need to understand statistical analysis methods to accurately analyze and interpret data gathered from the project. There are ethical considerations to consider as well that can limit the kinds of information that can be collected as well as how data collected needs to be handled. 

There are many components to writing a research study proposal that must be completed to receive approval, support, and funding. This research study proposal project gives experience navigating these various requirements. Completing this project proves that writing research proposals is as much an art as it is a science. 

## Conclusion

Library and information science (LIS) has historically been more practical and professional in nature. Research and research methods training have not always been a focus or requirement for the education of information professionals. Research in LIS is immature and low in quantity and quality (Powell, 2008, p. 177). Like the leaves on the end of a tree are important so are efforts in LIS to focus on practical uses and applications of general (or basic) research. But without the roots, trunk, and branches to hold up the leaves the tree is no longer a tree but a pile of leaves. The leaves value and use are lost without the rest of the tree (Brady, 2015). Just as tree leaves need the roots, trunk, and branches and the roots, trunk, and branches need tree leaves, LIS needs practical application as well as basic research. Basic research gives life to practical applications; applications lead to new research. 

The potential for LIS research to create and discover new truths and new ideas is enormous. The multi-disciplinary nature of the field positions it to receive and make significant contributions to humankind's knowledge. To tap into this potential requires learning, training, and practicing the use of qualitative and quantitative research methods, designing research projects, and evaluating and synthesizing research literature. Coursework completed in the SJSU MLIS program provided experience to learn these core principles of research. 

## References

Boswell, C. & Cannon, S. (2009). Critique Process in C. Boswell and S. Cannon (Eds.), *Introduction to nursing research: Incorporating evidence based practice* (p. 291-316). Burlington, MA: Jones and Bartlett Learning.

Brady, H. [Numberphile2]. (2015, May 14). *Why basic research is important - Numberphile*. [Video File]. Retrieved from <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6gnsQjPCC78>

Chapman, J. C. (2010). Observing users: An empirical analysis of user interaction with online finding aids. *Journal of Archival Organization*, 8(1), 4-30. doi: 10.1080/15332748.2010.484361

National Science Foundation. (1953). What is basic research? *Annual Report*. p. 38-48. Retrieved from <https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/1953/annualreports/ar_1953_sec6.pdf>

Powell, R. (2008). Research. In K. Haycock & B. E. Sheldon (Eds.), *The portable MLIS: Insights form the experts*. (p. 168-178). Westport, Connecticut: Libraries Unlimited.

Przeworski, A. & Salomon, F. (1995). *On the art of writing proposals*. Social Science Research Council. Retrieved from <http://www.ssrc.org/publications/view/7A9CB4F4-815F-DE11-BD80-001CC477EC70/>
